Updates to the Global roles for new 2.8 features (#898)
rancher/rancher-docs: docs/how-to-guides/new-user-guides/authentication-permissions-and-global-configuration/manage-role-based-access-control-rbac/global-permissions.md

:::

### Custom GlobalRoles

You can create custom GlobalRoles to satisfy use cases not directly addressed by built-in GlobalRoles. 

Create custom GlobalRole through the UI or through automation (such as the Rancher Kubernetes API). You can specify the same type of rules as the rules for upstream roles and clusterRoles. 

> #### Escalate and Bind verb

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Escalate and Bind verbs
```

> Users can create a custom GlobalRole using the UI or one of the supported automation methods. The rules that can specified are of the same type as the rules used by upstream roles and clusterRoles. 

Author: I left it a bit broad since you can use [terraform](https://registry.terraform.io/providers/rancher/rancher2/latest/docs/resources/global_role) as well. I can make the swap if we are ok with omitting that from our docs though.

> Users can create a custom GlobalRole using the UI or one of the supported automation methods. The rules that can specified are of the same type as the rules used by upstream roles and clusterRoles. 

Author: I've adjusted the language a bit here, but I don't think it's a good idea to attempt to enumerate all supported automation methods here. Let me know if you'd like to discuss further.

When giving permissions on GlobalRoles, keep in mind that Rancher respects the `escalate` and `bind` verbs, in a similar fashion to [Kubernetes](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/access-authn-authz/rbac/#restrictions-on-role-creation-or-update).

Both of these verbs, which are given on the GlobalRoles resource, can grant users the permission to bypass Rancher's privilege escalation checks. This potentially allows users to become admins. Since this represents a serious security risk, `bind` and `escalate` should be distributed to users with great caution. 

> The `escalate` verb allows users to change a GlobalRole and add any permission, even if the users doesn't have the permissions in the current GlobalRole or the new version of the GlobalRole. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `escalate` verb allows users to change a GlobalRole and add any permission, even if the users doesn't have the permissions in the current GlobalRole or the new version of the GlobalRole. 

```

The `bind` verb allows users to create a GlobalRoleBinding to the specified GlobalRole, even if they do not have the permissions in the GlobalRole. 

:::danger

The wildcard verb `*` also includes the `bind` and `escalate` verbs. This means that giving `*` on GlobalRoles to a user also gives them both `escalate` and `bind`.

:::

> ##### Examples

Reviewer: ```suggestion
##### Custom GlobalRole Examples
```

To grant permission to escalate only the `test-gr` GlobalRole:

```yaml
rules:
- apiGroups:
  - 'management.cattle.io'
  resources:
  - 'globalroles'
  resourceNames:
  - 'test-gr'
  verbs:
  - 'escalate'
```

To grant permission to escalate all GlobalRoles:

```yaml
rules:
- apiGroups:
  - 'management.cattle.io'
  resources:
  - 'globalroles'
  verbs:
  - 'escalate'
```

To grant permission to create bindings (which bypass escalation checks) to only the `test-gr` GlobalRole:

```yaml
rules:
- apiGroups:
  - 'management.cattle.io'
  resources:
  - 'globalroles'
  resourceNames:
  - 'test-gr'
  verbs:
  - 'bind'
- apiGroups:
  - 'management.cattle.io'
  resources:
  - 'globalrolebindings'
  verbs:
  - 'create'
```

> Granting `*` permissions (which also includes both `escalate` and `bind`):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Granting `*` permissions (which includes both `escalate` and `bind`):
```

```yaml
rules:
- apiGroups:
  - 'management.cattle.io'
  resources:
  - 'globalroles'
  verbs:
  - '*'
```

> #### Permissions on Downstream Clusters

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### GlobalRole Permissions on Downstream Clusters
```

GlobalRoles can grant one or more RoleTemplates on every downstream cluster through the `inheritedClusterRoles` field. Values in this field must refer to a RoleTemplate which exists and has a `context` of Cluster.

> With this field, users gain the specified permissions on all current or future downstream clusters. For an example, consider the following GlobalRole:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With this field, users gain the specified permissions on all current or future downstream clusters. For example, consider the following GlobalRole:
```

```yaml
apiVersion: management.cattle.io/v3
kind: GlobalRole
displayName: All Downstream Owner 
metadata:
  name: all-downstream-owner
inheritedClusterRoles:
- cluster-owner
```

Any user with this permission will be a cluster-owner on all downstream clusters. If a new cluster is added, regardless of type, the user will be an owner on that cluster as well.

:::danger

> Using this field on [default Global Roles](#configuring-default-global-permissions) may result in users gaining excessive permissions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Using this field on [default GlobalRoles](#configuring-default-global-permissions) may result in users gaining excessive permissions.
```

:::

### Custom GlobalRoles

You can create custom GlobalRoles to satisfy use cases not directly addressed by built-in GlobalRoles. 

> Create custom GlobalRole through the UI or through automation (such as the Rancher Kubernetes API). You can specify the same type of rules as the rules for upstream roles and clusterRoles. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Create custom GlobalRoles through the UI or through automation (such as the Rancher Kubernetes API). You can specify the same type of rules as the rules for upstream roles and clusterRoles. 
```

1. Click **Refresh Group Memberships**.

**Result:** Any changes to the group members' permissions will take effect.

## Restricted Admin

:::warning Deprecated

> The Restricted Admin role is deprecated, and will be removed in a future version of Rancher (2.10 or higher). As an alternative, you should make a custom role with the desired permissions instead of relying on this built-in role).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Restricted Admin role is deprecated, and will be removed in a future version of Rancher (2.10 or higher). You should make a custom role with the desired permissions instead of relying on this built-in role.
```

:::

> A new `restricted-admin` role was created in Rancher v2.5 in order to prevent privilege escalation from the local Rancher server Kubernetes cluster. This role has full administrator access to all downstream clusters managed by Rancher, but it does not have permission to alter the local Kubernetes cluster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Rancher v2.5 introduced the `restricted-admin` role, to prevent privilege escalation originating from the upstream (local) Rancher cluster. This role has full administrator access to all downstream clusters managed by Rancher, but it doesn't have permission to alter the local Kubernetes cluster.
```

Author: This comment is not correct - the escalation would be targeting the local cluster, not originating from the local cluster. I'll try to integrate new language into the sentence accordingly.

> A new `restricted-admin` role was created in Rancher v2.5 in order to prevent privilege escalation from the local Rancher server Kubernetes cluster. This role has full administrator access to all downstream clusters managed by Rancher, but it does not have permission to alter the local Kubernetes cluster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A new `restricted-admin` role was created in Rancher v2.5 in order to prevent privilege escalation on the local Rancher server Kubernetes cluster. This role has full administrator access to all downstream clusters managed by Rancher, but it does not have permission to alter the local Kubernetes cluster.
```

Author: This section is one of several that I did not write or change. I would like to focus on the changed parts rather than re-writing the existing restricted-admin docs.

The `restricted-admin` can create other `restricted-admin` users with an equal level of access.

> A new setting was added to Rancher to set the initial bootstrapped administrator to have the `restricted-admin` role. This applies to the first user created when the Rancher server is started for the first time. If the environment variable is set, then no global administrator would be created, and it would be impossible to create the global administrator through Rancher.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The initial bootstrapped administrator account has the `restricted-admin` role. The bootstrapped admin is the first user created when the Rancher server is initialized. If the environment variable is set, then no global administrator then no global administrator is created, and you are prevented from creating the global administrator through Rancher
```

<s>"If the environment variable is set" -- meaning `CATTLE_RESTRICTED_DEFAULT_ADMIN=false`? We should specify that here.</s>

After re-reading a couple of times -- are we saying that 2.8 introduces `CATTLE_RESTRICTED_DEFAULT_ADMIN`?

In that case:

```suggestion
Rancher v2.8.0 introduces `CATTLE_RESTRICTED_DEFAULT_ADMIN`, an environment variable which ensures that the initial bootstrapped administrator account has the `restricted-admin` role. The bootstrapped admin is the first user created when the Rancher server is initialized. If the environment variable is set to `true`, then no global administrator is created, and you are prevented from creating the global administrator through Rancher.
```

> To bootstrap Rancher with the `restricted-admin` as the initial user, the Rancher server should be started with the following environment variable:

Reviewer: What's the default behavior?

Author: This section is one of several that I did not write or change. I would like to focus on the changed parts rather than re-writing the existing restricted-admin docs.

| | GlobalDNS Entries | Yes | Yes (Self) | Yes | |
| Settings | | | | | |
| | Manage Settings | Yes | No (Can list) | No (Can list) | |
| User | | | | | |
| | Manage API Keys | Yes (Manage all) | Yes (Manage self) | Yes (Manage self) | |
| | Manage Node Templates | Yes | Yes (Manage self) | Yes (Manage self) | Can only manage their own node templates and not those created by other users |
| | Manage Cloud Credentials | Yes | Yes (Manage self) | Yes (Manage self) | Can only manage their own cloud credentials and not those created by other users |
| Downstream Cluster | Create Cluster | Yes | Yes | Yes | |
| | Edit Cluster | Yes | Yes | Yes | |
| | Rotate Certificates	| Yes | | Yes | |
| | Snapshot Now | Yes | | Yes | |
| | Restore Snapshot | Yes | | Yes | |
| | Save as RKE Template | Yes | No | Yes | |
| | Run CIS Scan | Yes | Yes | Yes | |
| | Add Members	| Yes | Yes | Yes | |
| | Create Projects | Yes | Yes | Yes | |
| Feature Charts since v2.5 | | | | | |
| | Install Fleet | Yes | | Yes | Should not be able to run Fleet in local cluster |
| | Deploy EKS cluster | Yes | Yes | Yes | |
| | Deploy GKE cluster | Yes | Yes | Yes | |
| | Deploy AKS cluster | Yes | Yes | Yes | |

> ### Changing Global Administrators to Restricted Admins

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Changing Global Administrators to Restricted Admins
```

This heading seems misleading -- we're advising the reader to change restricted admins to instead have custom roles with similar permissions, right?

Author: This section is one of several that I did not write or change. I would like to focus on the changed parts rather than re-writing the existing restricted-admin docs.

> If Rancher already has a global administrator, they should change all global administrators over to the new `restricted-admin` role.

Reviewer 2: Can you remove or change this line. I don't believe it was ever correct. 
```suggestion
If Rancher already has a global administrator, they have the option to change all global administrators over to the new `restricted-admin` role.
```

Author: Discussed offline, will be changed to recommend cluster permissions over RA entirely, like the below:
> In previous versions, the docs recommended that all users should be changed over to restricted admin if the role was in use. Users are now encouraged to use a custom-built role using the cluster permissions feature, and migrate any current restricted admins to use that approach.

> In previous version, the docs recommended that all users should be changed over to Restricted Admin if the role was in use. Users are now encouraged to use a custom-built role using the cluster permissions feature, and migrate any current restricted admins to use that approach. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To future-proof your clusters against the `restricted-admin` deprecation, create a custom-built role with the cluster permissions feature, and migrate any current users who are restricted admins. 
```

> This can be done through **Security > Users** and moving any Administrator role over to Restricted Administrator.

Reviewer: How does the user access **Security**?

> Signed-in users can change themselves over to the `restricted-admin` if they wish, but they should only do that as the last step, otherwise they won't have the permissions to do so.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Signed-in users can change themselves over to the `restricted-admin` if they wish, but they should only do that as the last step, otherwise they won't have the permissions to update their role.
```
